ABSTRACT
Unfold is a modern, premium mobile application designed to simplify home management, organization, and do-it-yourself (DIY) tasks. It serves as a centralized hub where users can discover neatly categorized life tips, bookmark their favorite guides for quick access, and interact with an advanced AI assistant directly within the app. By providing a curated feed of actionable advice ("Tip of the Day", "Featured Tip") and seamlessly integrating Google Generative AI for personalized troubleshooting, Unfold brings clarity and efficiency to household maintenance.

Built using the Flutter framework with the Dart programming language, the system implements a local-first architecture utilizing SQLite and Shared Preferences for lighting-fast, completely private data storage. Key features include an intuitive, highly polished user interface featuring custom animations and glassmorphic elements, local authentication, real-time AI-powered chat, and a robust search engine. Unfold successfully bridges the gap between scattered internet searches and verified, accessible knowledge, replacing fragmented sources with a structured, elegant mobile application.

The system has been fully developed and tested on multiple platforms. Future enhancements include cloud synchronization, community-driven tip submissions, and real-time collaborative task management.


CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background of the Study
1.2 Problem Statement
1.3 Objectives
1.4 Scope of the Project
1.5 Organization of the Report

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Introduction to Existing Systems
2.2 Review of Related Works
2.2.1 General Search Engines (Google, Bing)
2.2.2 Video Platforms (YouTube)
2.2.3 Pinterest
2.2.4 Specialized Forums (Reddit, StackExchange)
2.3 Comparative Analysis
2.4 Limitations of Existing Systems
2.5 Proposed System Overview

CHAPTER 3: SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
3.1 Purpose
3.2 Overall Description
3.2.1 Product Perspective
3.2.2 Product Functions
3.3 Functional Requirements
3.4 Non-Functional Requirements

CHAPTER 4: SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
4.1 Architectural Paradigms
4.2 System Data Models
4.3 Application State Flow
4.4 Core Algorithm: AI Assistant Integration

CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION
5.1 Development Environment & Tooling
5.2 Comprehensive Module Implementation
5.2.1 Local Storage Implementation (SQLite)
5.2.2 AI Services Integration (Generative AI)
5.2.3 Client-Side UI Implementation (Flutter Widgets)

CHAPTER 6: TESTING
6.1 Testing Strategy
6.2 Comprehensive Test Case Matrix

CHAPTER 7: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
7.1 System Output & Achievements
7.2 Developmental Observations & Technical Impediments

CHAPTER 8: CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
8.1 Conclusion
8.2 Future Scope

REFERENCES
APPENDIX A: Extended Sample Code
APPENDIX B: Screenshots



Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1 Background of the Study
The rapid growth of the digital age has made information incredibly abundant, yet ironically harder to curate and trust. When it comes to household management, cleaning, organization, and minor DIY repairs, individuals frequently rely on a chaotic mix of blog posts, video tutorials, and forum threads. While the internet holds the answers to almost any home-related query, the process of finding concise, reliable, and well-structured information is often frustrating and time-consuming.

Modern software engineering provides the tools to solve this curation problem. By bringing structured data into a native mobile environment and pairing it with large language models (LLMs), users can access expert-level guidance instantly. Unfold was conceptualized to serve as a calming, beautifully designed "home base" for managing one's living space. It integrates static, curated tip databases with an active Generative AI chat assistant to provide a perfect blend of exploration and on-demand problem solving.

1.2 Problem Statement
Individuals lack a centralized, ad-free, and aesthetic digital platform for discovering and storing practical home management tips. Consequently, users are forced to sift through SEO-bloated articles or lengthy videos just to find the answer to simple questions like "How to clean a microwave?" or "How to fix a leaky faucet." Furthermore, when users encounter specific edge-cases not covered by standard articles, they lack a dedicated, context-aware assistant to guide them. This disconnect between user intent and information accessibility limits productivity and creates unnecessary friction in daily household maintenance.

1.3 Objectives
The primary objectives of the Unfold project are:
1. To architect and develop a premium, cross-platform mobile application that provides curated, categorized home management tips.
2. To build a highly responsive User Interface (UI) featuring fluid animations, custom themes, and a modern aesthetic.
3. To engineer a reliable local-first database utilizing SQLite for lightning-fast bookmarks and data retrieval without relying on internet connectivity for core reading features.
4. To integrate an advanced AI chatbot leveraging Google Generative AI to answer personalized user queries in real-time.
5. To implement robust local search functionality that string-matches across tip titles, subtitles, and internal procedural steps.
6. To create a secure, localized authentication and user profile system utilizing device-level storage.

1.4 Scope of the Project
The technical and functional scope of Unfold encompasses the design and development of a native-feeling mobile application using the Flutter framework. The app serves individual end-users by offering:
- Discoverability: A home screen featuring dynamic "Tip of the Day" and "Featured Tip" elements alongside categorized grids.
- Personalization: The ability to save (bookmark) tasks and tips to a personal repository stored safely on the device via SQLite.
- AI Assistance: A dedicated chat interface ("Ask Unfold AI") that processes natural language queries and returns highly formatted, markdown-rendered troubleshooting steps.
- Performance: A completely decoupled frontend-to-local-database approach ensuring zero-latency reads for static content.

The current iteration focuses exclusively on a mobile deployment model optimized for iOS and Android environments, enforcing a "local-first" privacy model where user bookmarks and chat logs are not exposed to external third-party cloud analytics.

1.5 Organization of the Report
Chapter 1 outlines the contextual background, problem statement, and scope.
Chapter 2 analyzes existing solutions (search engines, forums) and details Unfold's unique proposition.
Chapter 3 rigorously documents the functional and non-functional requirements.
Chapter 4 delves into technical architectures, including local database schema and state flows.
Chapter 5 details the implementation phase, including Dart code snippets and widget structuring.
Chapter 6 outlines the chosen testing methodologies.
Chapter 7 synthesizes the platform's achievements and UI/UX accomplishments.
Chapter 8 summarizes the overarching outcomes and outlines future application development.



Chapter 2
LITERATURE REVIEW

2.1 Introduction to Existing Systems
To establish a solid foundation for Unfold, an analysis of digital platforms currently used for home DIY and lifestyle curation was conducted. The ecosystem relies heavily on broad-spectrum tools: search engines, video sharing platforms, and image-based curation tools. However, these systems are fundamentally designed for engagement, advertising revenue, and broad traffic rather than localized, user-centric task resolution.

2.2 Review of Related Works
2.2.1 General Search Engines (Google, Bing)
These platforms index the internet to provide articles related to a user's query. While comprehensive, the UX is often derailed by SEO-optimized life-style blogs that force the user to read through irrelevant narratives and aggressive advertisements before revealing the actual steps to complete a task.

2.2.2 Video Platforms (YouTube)
Highly effective for complex visual tasks, but inefficient for simple queries. Users must scrub through videos, navigate sponsorships, and cannot easily copy text or generate dynamic checklists from the media.

2.2.3 Pinterest
The de-facto visual discovery engine. It is excellent for inspiration but heavily fragmented. Tips are often embedded directly into low-resolution images without accessible text, and finding the original source article can lead to dead links or paywalls.

2.3 Limitations of Existing Systems
The critical limitations constraining existing platforms include:
- Information Bloat: Users are forced to consume unnecessary content (ads, long intro stories) to extract a single tip.
- Lack of Interactivity: Static articles and videos cannot converse with the user to clarify specific doubts or adjust steps based on the tools the user has on hand.
- Lack of Privacy: Every search query is tracked and monetized by the host platform.

2.4 Proposed System Overview
In response to these gaps, Unfold is proposed as an advanced, local-first Flutter application. Unfold curates step-by-step metadata locally and combines it with the reasoning capabilities of an embedded Google Generative AI agent. The result is an application strictly focused on aesthetic utility. Users interact with a beautiful, ad-free interface where answers are direct, offline-available (for curated tips), and easily explorable.



Chapter 3
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION

3.1 Purpose
This section formalizes the functional and non-functional requirements of Unfold, guiding the architectural decisions regarding Flutter widget trees, state management, local storage, and external API integration.

3.2 Overall Description
Unfold operates as a standalone mobile application. It relies on a local JSON data source mapped into Dart objects for predefined tips, a SQLite instance for relational state (bookmarks), and RESTful communication with Google's API for the GenAI chat interface.

3.3 Functional Requirements
1. Authentication: The app must support an initial personalized log-in flow, saving the user's name and credentials to secure shared preferences.
2. Home Dashboard: Must render daily variable content ("Tip of the Day", "Featured Tip") dynamically calculated via time-based modulo algorithms.
3. Category Navigation: Users can filter tips by rigorous categories (e.g., Cleaning, Organizing).
4. Bookmark Engine: Users must be able to add/remove tips from a local SQLite database and view them in a dedicated 'Saved' tab.
5. AI Chat Interface: The system must provide a chat UI that sends user queries to Google Generative AI, parses the Markdown response, and renders it safely on-screen, complete with typing indicators.
6. Local Search: A deeply integrated search bar that evaluates user typings against multiple attributes of the Tip data models in real-time.

3.4 Non-Functional Requirements
1. Premium Aesthetics: The UI must enforce fluid 60FPS animations, utilize Cupertino/Material 3 transitions, implement blur/glassmorphic effects, and strictly follow a unified color palette (AppColors.rose, AppColors.cream).
2. Performance & Latency: Local searches and database queries must resolve in under 100ms.
3. Fallback Gracefulness: The AI chat must elegantly handle network failures, providing helpful error states instead of crashing the application.



Chapter 4
SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND DESIGN

4.1 Architectural Paradigms
Unfold utilizes a modernized Provider/Service locator pattern specific to Flutter. The architecture separates concerns strictly:
- UI Layer (Screens & Widgets): Stateless and Stateful widgets relying on standard Flutter animation hooks and controllers.
- Service Layer (TipsService, AuthService, DatabaseService, AiService): Singleton classes managing business logic, external API calls, and data mapping.
- Data Layer (Local JSON + SQLite): The ultimate source of truth for application content and user states.

4.2 System Data Models
- Tip: Represents a single actionable guide. Contains `id`, `title`, `subtitle`, `categoryId`, `difficulty`, `estimatedTime`, and a list of `TipStep` sub-items.
- TipCategory: Maps the visual category (e.g., icon, color representations) to its respective localized string.
- Bookmark: A SQLite relational table mapping a `userId` against a `tipId`.
- Message: An in-memory object tracking `text` and a boolean `isUser` flag for the Chat UI layout parsing.

4.3 Application State Flow
1. App Launch -> Check `AuthService` (SharedPrefs).
2. If authenticated -> Initialize `DatabaseService` -> Load base JSON -> Query SQLite for bookmarks -> Route to `HomeScreen`.
3. If not authenticated -> Route to `LoginScreen` -> Await User Action -> Save to Prefs -> Route to `HomeScreen`.

4.4 Core Algorithm: AI Chat Integration
When the user submits a query:
1. Append User `Message` to local state array; set `_isTyping = true`.
2. Triggers UI re-render (ListView scrolls to bottom contextually).
3. Invokes `AiService.sendMessage()` triggering an asynchronous HTTP call to the Google Generative AI endpoint.
4. Awaits payload; upon resolution, maps Markdown response into a System `Message`.
5. Sets `_isTyping = false`; triggers final UI re-render.



Chapter 5
IMPLEMENTATION

5.1 Development Environment & Tooling
- Framework: Flutter SDK (^3.10.7)
- Language: Dart
- Local Database: sqflite (^2.4.2), shared_preferences
- AI Integration: google_generative_ai (^0.4.7)
- UI Utilities: flutter_markdown, cupertino_icons
- Target Platforms: iOS / Android

5.2 Comprehensive Module Implementation

5.2.1 Local Storage Implementation (SQLite)
To track user favorites efficiently, `DatabaseService` handles schema creation and simple CRUD actions.
```dart
Future<Database> _initDB() async {
  final dbPath = await getDatabasesPath();
  final path = join(dbPath, 'unfold_app.db');
  return await openDatabase(
    path,
    version: 1,
    onCreate: (db, version) async {
      await db.execute('''
        CREATE TABLE bookmarks(
          id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
          userId TEXT NOT NULL,
          tipId TEXT NOT NULL,
          createdAt TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
          UNIQUE(userId, tipId)
        )
      ''');
    },
  );
}
```

5.2.2 AI Services Integration
The app leverages Google's Generative AI Dart SDK to instantiate a chat session that retains context, heavily relying on async/await.
```dart
Future<String?> sendMessage(String text) async {
  if (_chat == null) return null;
  try {
    final response = await _chat!.sendMessage(Content.text(text));
    return response.text;
  } catch (e) {
    return "I'm having trouble connecting. Please check your internet connection and try again.";
  }
}
```

5.2.3 Client-Side UI Implementation
The UI extensively utilizes `CustomScrollView`, `SliverAppBar`, and `TweenAnimationBuilder` to create a visually striking, premium application flow without jank. The chat interface implements real-time markdown parsing to format AI instructions elegantly.



Chapter 6
TESTING

6.1 Testing Strategy
The application underwent rigorous interactive and device-level testing. 
- Unit Testing: Validate that singleton services properly load mock JSON configurations and properly toggle SQLite DB states.
- Widget Testing: Validate that the CustomScrollView does not overflow boundaries on smaller device form factors.
- Integration Testing: Validating the flow from clicking the 'Bookmark' icon inside `TipDetailScreen` to asserting it dynamically renders on the `BookmarksScreen`.
- Edge Case Testing: Turning off Wi-Fi and triggering the AI Chat to ensure the try/catch logic properly captures SocketExceptions.



Chapter 7
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

7.1 System Output & Achievements
The deployment of Unfold proved highly successful in meeting its primary objective: distilling complex household management concepts into a clean, highly accessible mobile UI.
- Aesthetic Synergy: Implementing custom app themes (AppColors.rose, AppColors.cream) alongside curved UI edges creates a non-intimidating, approachable digital tool environment.
- Instantaneous Feel: By pre-loading JSON strings synchronously at launch and leveraging local SQLite, moving through categories and searches feels entirely unblocked by network constraints.
- LLM Utility: The integration of `flutter_markdown` mapping AI outputs resulted in highly readable checklists and codes.

7.2 Technical Impediments
- Handling AI Context Windows: Early iterations of the chat service occasionally hit context limits or timed out on slow connections. Resolving this required implementing stricter HTTP timeout catches and manually clearing chat context if it ballooned excessively.
- Flutter UI Reflows: Animating the bottom navigation bar alongside nested PageViews required careful management of `IndexedStack` to preserve the state of the ChatScreen scroll-view when navigating away and back.



Chapter 8
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS

8.1 Conclusion
The Unfold project successfully architected a highly polished, robust mobile application tailored for home and lifestyle management. By breaking away from the reliance on cluttered web search engines, Unfold proves that structured, local-first data combined with direct AI troubleshooting provides a vastly superior user experience. The application stands as a testament to modern cross-platform development, executing native-feeling animations and complex database interactions rapidly using the Flutter framework.

8.2 Future Scope
To evolve Unfold further, future developmental phases will focus on:
- Cloud Synchronization: Replacing/augmenting SQLite with Firebase or Supabase to allow users to sync their bookmarks across multiple devices seamlessly.
- Visual AI Processing: Upgrading the Generative AI integration to accept Vision modalities, allowing a user to take a photo of a broken appliance within the chat, relying on the LLM to identify the damage and suggest repair tips.
- Community Sourcing: Allowing vetted users to submit natively formatted tips into a global repository.



APPENDIX
Appendix A: Extended Sample Code

A.1 Dynamic Animation Routing (TweenAnimationBuilder example)
```dart
TweenAnimationBuilder<double>(
  tween: Tween(begin: 0.0, end: 1.0),
  duration: const Duration(milliseconds: 600),
  curve: Curves.easeOutCubic,
  builder: (context, value, child) {
    return Transform.translate(
      offset: Offset(0, 20 * (1 - value)),
      child: Opacity(opacity: value, child: child),
    );
  },
  child: CategoryCard(...),
);
```

Appendix B: Screenshots
[Note: Actual image binary blobs omitted for text format. In production, screenshots demonstrating the Glassmorphic UI, Search functionality, Bookmarks grid, and Markdown-rendered Chat logic would be placed here.]
